.TH TRACEDSP 1 2011/12/11
.SH NAME
Trace DSP, a time series processor for SAC and Mini-SEED data

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
tracedsp [options] file1 [file2 file3 ...]

.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtracedsp\fP is a digital signal processor for time series data in
SAC and Mini-SEED format.  For each continuous time series in the
input data the specified operations will be performed in order.

If '-' is specified standard input will be read.  Multiple input files
will be processed in the order specified.  If an input file name is
prefixed with an '@' character the file is assumed to contain a list
of input data files, see \fILIST FILES\fP below.

When a input file is full SEED including both SEED headers and data
records all of the headers will be skipped and completely unprocessed.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "-V         "
Print program version and exit.

.IP "-h         "
Print program usage and exit.

.IP "-v         "
Be more verbose.  This flag can be used multiple times ("-v -v" or
"-vv") for more verbosity.

.IP "-s         "
Print a basic summary including the number of records and the number
of samples they included after processing all input records.

.IP "-tt \fIsecs\fP"
Specify a time tolerance for constructing continous trace
segments. The tolerance is specified in seconds.  The default
tolerance is 1/2 of the sample period.

.IP "-rt \fIdiff\fP"
Specify a sample rate tolerance for constructing continous trace
segments. The tolerance is specified as the difference between two
sampling rates.  The default tolerance is tested as: (abs(1-sr1/sr2) <
0.0001).

.IP "-ts \fItime\fP"
Limit processing to Mini-SEED records that start after \fItime\fP.
The format of the \fItime\fP arguement
is: 'YYYY[,DDD,HH,MM,SS,FFFFFF]' where valid delimiters are either
commas (,), colons (:) or periods (.).

.IP "-te \fItime\fP"
Limit processing to Mini-SEED records that end before \fItime\fP.
The format of the \fItime\fP arguement
is: 'YYYY[,DDD,HH,MM,SS,FFFFFF]' where valid delimiters are either
commas (,), colons (:) or periods (.).

.IP "-MSEED"
Write output as Mini-SEED instead of SAC.

.IP "-Mr \fIbytes\fP"
Specify the input record length in \fIbytes\fP.  By default the
length of the first Mini-SEED record is automatically detected, this
option forces the record length.  The option is required when the
input records do not contain a 1000 Blockette.

.IP "-Me \fIencoding\fP"
Specify the data encoding format.  These encoding values are the same
as those specified in the SEED 1000 Blockette.

.IP "-MR \fIbytes\fP"
Specify the record length in \fIbytes\fP for output Mini-SEED data.
The default record length will be 4096 bytes.

.IP "-ME \fIencoding\fP"
Specify the \fIencoding\fP format output Mini-SEED data.  This can be one of:
.nf
3  : 32-bit integers
4  : 32-bit floating point numbers
5  : 64-bit floating point numbers
10 : Steim-1 integer compression
11 : Stime-2 integer compression
.fi 

.IP "-Sf \fIformat\fP"
Specify the SAC output type, the default is SAC binary in host
computer byte order.  This can be one of:
.nf
1 : SAC alphanumeric format
2 : SAC binary format in host computer byte order (default)
3 : SAC binary in little-endian byte order
4 : SAC binary in big-endian byte order
.fi

.IP "-m \fImetafile\fP"
Specify a file containing metadata such as scaling factor,
coordinates, elevation, component orientation, etc.  For each
time series written any matching metadata will be added to the SAC
header.  see \fIMETADATA FILES\fP below.

.IP "-msi       "
Convert any component inclination values in a metadata file from SEED
(dip) to SAC convention, this is a simple matter of adding 90 degrees.

.IP "-c \fIchannel\fP"
Specify a \fIchannel/component\fP for processed output data, this
effectively overrides the channel component in the input data.

.IP "-o \fIoutfile\fP"
Specify the output file name.  This is optional and if not specified
file names will be generated based on source parameters and data start
time.  SAC files cannot contain more than a single segment of data, if
this option is used and more than a single SAC segment is written as
output the file will be overwritten.

.IP "-od \fIdirectory\fP"
If no output file is explicitly specified the program will generate
output file name(s).  This option controls which directories these
file(s) will be written to.

.IP "-plog \fIlogfile\fP"
Write log entries detailing the processing applied to each segment to
the specified file.

.IP "-CR \fIrespfile[:start:stop]\fP"
Convolve the time series with the response specified in the SEED RESP
file.  Optionally the starting and ending stages can be limited by
specifying them as \fIstart\fP and \fIstop\fP.

.IP "-DR \fIrespfile[:start:stop]\fP"
Deconvolve the response specified in the SEED RESP file from the
time series.  Optionally the starting and ending stages can be limited
by specifying them as \fIstart\fP and \fIstop\fP.

.IP "-CS \fIpzfile\fP"
Convolve the time series with the response specified in the SAC poles
and zeros file.

.IP "-DS \fIpzfile\fP"
Deconvolve the response specified in the SAC poles and zeros file from
the time series.

.IP "\fBSPECIAL CASE\fP"
When a deconvolution operation is directly followed by a convolution
operation they will be combined into a composite transfer operation
for stability and efficiency.

.IP "-FL \fIf1/f2/f3/f4\fP"
Specify the frequency limits for deconvolution operations, frequencies
are specified in Hertz.  The limits are applied as a cosine taper that
scales the spectrum from 0 to 1 between f1 and f2 and from 1 to 0
between f3 and f4 in the frequency domain.

.IP "-FLa lowerdBdown[/upperdBdown]"
Automatically determine frequency limits for deconvolution.  A pass
band is determined for all frequencies with the lower and upper corner
cutoffs defined in terms of dB down from the maximum amplitude.  The
upper corner definition is optional and defaults to 3 dB down.  This
algorithm is designed to work with flat responses, i.e. a reponse in
velocity for an instrument which is flat to velocity.  Other
combinations will likely result in unsatisfactory results, i.e. a SAC
PZ response in displacement for a sensor flat to velocity.

.IP "-W"
Prewhiten the time series data before and dewhiten after any
(de)convolution operations.  Whitening is performed in the time
domain.

.IP "-Wo \fIorder\fP"
Specify the prediction filter \fIorder\fP used for whitening, default
order is 6.

.IP "-Rts"
Use the total channel sensitivity when (de)convolving with responses
specified in SEED RESP format.  By default evalresp calculates the
total gain as the product of stage gains.  This option allows using a
subset of the stages combined with the full scale sensitivity,
primarily useful to calculate a response using just the poles and
zeros stage with the full sensitivity (as would be done with a SAC
poles and zeros file).  This is equivalent to the -ts evalresp option.

.IP "-Red"
Use the estimated delay in SEED RESP files instead of the correction
applied value when (de)convolving asymmetric FIR filters.  This is
equivalent to the -use-estimated-delay evalresp option.
	
.IP "-Rin"
Ignore the SEED naming parameters when (de)convolving with responses
specified in SEED RESP format, i.e. use the first response found in
the specified RESP file.  By default the network, station, location
and channel of the time series are matched with an appropriate
response in the specified RESP file.

.IP "-Ru \fIunits\fP"
Specify the output units for the response calculated with evalresp for
SEED RESP (de)convolution operations.  By default the output units of
the response will be the input units specified in the RESP.

.IP "-LP \fIfrequency[/order]\fP"
Low-pass filter the time series using an IIR filter derived from a low
pass cutoff in Hertz and a filter order.  The filter \fPorder\fP can
optionally be specified and defaults to 4.  The filter is applied in
the forward and reverse directions to eliminate phase distortion.  The
argument \fB-LP1\fP can be used to request a single pass filter, phase
distortion might be present.

.IP "-HP \fIfrequency[/order]\fP"
High-pass filter the time series using an IIR filter derived from a
high pass cutoff in Hertz and a filter order.  The filter \fPorder\fP
can optionally be specified and defaults to 4.  The filter is applied
in the forward and reverse directions to eliminate phase distortion.
The argument \fB-HP1\fP can be used to request a single pass filter,
phase distortion might be present.

.IP "-BP \fIfrequency[/order]:frequency[/order]\fP"
Band-pass filter the time series using an IIR filter derived from low
and high pass cutoff frequencies in Hertz and filter orders.  The
filter orders can optionally be specified and default to 4.  The
filter is applied in the forward and reverse directions to eliminate
phase distortion.  The argument \fB-BP1\fP can be used to request a
single pass filter, phase distortion might be present.

.IP "\fBFILTER OPERATIONS RETAIN DC OFFSET \fP"
The \fB-LP\fP, \fB-HP\fP and \fB-BP\fP filtering operations retain the
original DC offset by removing the mean value prior to filtering and
restoring the mean value after the filter operation is complete.

.IP "-D2"
Perform a 2-point, uncentered differentiation on the time series.
This results in one less sample and a time-shift of 1/2 sample period.

.IP "-IT"
Perform integration the time series using the trapezoidal (midpoint)
method.  This results in one less sample and a time-shift of 1/2
sample period.

.IP "-RM"
Remove the mean from the time series.

.IP "-SC \fIfactor\fP"
Scale the time series by \fIfactor\fP, i.e. multiple each data sample
by \fIfactor\fP.

.IP "-SI \fIfactor\fP"
Scale the time series by the inverse of \fIfactor\fP, i.e. divide each
data sample by \fIfactor\fP.

.IP "-DEC \fIfactor\fP"
Decimate the time series by \fIfactor\fP and apply an anti-alias FIR
filter.  The decimation \fIfactor\fP must be between 2 and 7.  The
hardcoded linear-phase anti-alias filters are the same default filters
used by SAC and should not disrupt the phase characteristics of the
signal.

.IP "-TAP \fIwidth[:type]\fP"
Apply symmetric taper of to the time series.  The taper window
\fIwidth\fP is specified as a percent of the trace length from 0 to
0.5.  An optional window type may be specified, supported types are:

.nf
HANNING (default)
HAMMING
COSINE
.fi

.IP "-ENV"
Calculate the envelope of the time series.  This calculation uses a
Hilbert transform approximated by a time domain filter.

.IP "-DTRIM"
Trim each data segment to the common extents for each channel.  In
other words, trim each segment to start at the latest start time of
any channel and end at the earliest end time of any channel.  In
different words, make all channels start and end at the same times.

.IP "-STATS"
Calculate simple series statistics for each segment and add to the
process log (see the \fB-plog\fP option), the verbose option will also
cause them to be printed to stderr.  The statistics include: minimum,
maximum, mean, standard deviation and RMS.

.SH METADATA FILES
A metadata file contains a list of station parameters, some of which
can be stored in SAC but not in Mini-SEED.  Each line in a metadata
file should be a comma-separated list of parameters in the following
order:

.nf
Network (KNETWK)
Station (KSTNM)
Location (KHOLE)
Channel (KCMPNM)
Latitude (STLA)
Longitude (STLO)
Elevation (STEL), in meters [not currently used by SAC]
Depth (STDP), in meters [not currently used by SAC]
Component Azimuth (CMPAZ), degrees clockwise from north
Component Incident Angle (CMPINC), degrees from vertical
Instrument Name (KINST), up to 8 characters
Scale Factor (SCALE)
Scale Frequency, unused
Scale Units, unused
Sampling rate, unused
Start time, used for matching
End time, used for matching


For example:
------------------
#net,sta,loc,chan,lat,lon,elev,depth,azimuth,SACdip,instrument,scale,scalefreq,scaleunits,samplerate,start,end
IU,ANMO,00,BH1,34.945981,-106.457133,1671,145,328,90,Geotech KS-54000,3456610000,0.02,M/S,20,2008-06-30T20:00:00,2599-12-31T23:59:59
IU,ANMO,00,BH2,34.945981,-106.457133,1671,145,58,90,Geotech KS-54000,3344370000,0.02,M/S,20,2008-06-30T20:00:00,2599-12-31T23:59:59
IU,ANMO,00,BHZ,34.945981,-106.457133,1671,145,0,0,Geotech KS-54000,3275080000,0.02,M/S,20,2008-06-30T20:00:00,2599-12-31T23:59:59
IU,ANMO,10,BH1,34.945913,-106.457122,1767.2,48.8,64,90,Guralp CMG3-T,32805600000,0.02,M/S,40,2008-06-30T20:00:00,2599-12-31T23:59:59
IU,ANMO,10,BH2,34.945913,-106.457122,1767.2,48.8,154,90,Guralp CMG3-T,32655000000,0.02,M/S,40,2008-06-30T20:00:00,2599-12-31T23:59:59
IU,ANMO,10,BHZ,34.945913,-106.457122,1767.2,48.8,0,0,Guralp CMG3-T,33067200000,0.02,M/S,40,2008-06-30T20:00:00,2599-12-31T23:59:59
------------------

As a special case '--' can be used to match a blank (space, space)
location code.
.fi

For each time series written, metadata from the first line with
matching source name parameters (network, station, location and
channel) and time window (if specified) will be inserted into the SAC
header.  All parameters are optional except for the first four fields
specifying the source name parameters.

Simple wildcarding: for the source name parameters that will be
matched a '*' character in a field will match anything.  The BHZ
metadata lines above, for example, can be (almost) summarized as:

.nf
IU,ANMO,*,BHZ,34.9459,-106.4571,1671,145,0,0,Geotech KS-54000,3456610000,0.02,M/S,20,2008-06-30T20:00:00,2599-12-31T23:59:59
.fi

.SH LIST FILES
If an input file is prefixed with an '@' character the file is assumed
to contain a list of file for input.  Multiple list files can be
combined with multiple input files on the command line.  The last,
space separated field on each line is assumed to be the file name to
be read.

An example of a simple text list:

.nf
TA.ELFS..LHE.R.mseed
TA.ELFS..LHN.R.mseed
TA.ELFS..LHZ.R.mseed
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Chad Trabant
IRIS Data Management Center

In an effort to avoid reinventing the wheel and creating new bugs many
of the core data processing routines were borrowed from other
developments including, but not limited to, SAC 2000, PQLX, Seismic
Handler and others.  Any new bugs introduced are mine.
.fi
